Analogy is a pair of terms that has a common relationship. Usually, you will not
only determine the common relationship between each pair but you will also identify
which term makes up each pair. In other words, analogy is word relationships.

(A) (B)
Example: face: body: : monitor: computer
(Face and body are related since the face is part of the body in the same manner
as monitor and computer are related since the monitor is part of a computer.)

Analogy is used by writers to connect unfamiliar words or new ideas with
common and familiar objects. Through analogies, the reader analyzes a pair of terms
by examining its similarities and differences and figures out the connection between
them.

Common Types of Analogy

Type Meaning Examples
1. Synonyms The words have the same meaning. Small: tiny : : wide: large
2. Antonyms The words have opposite

meanings.

Light: dark : humble: proud
3. Part to whole A word is part of the other word. Finger: hand :: petal: flower
4. Cause and effect One word is the result of the other

word.

Fire: smoke: : explosion: loud
noise

5. Person to place/
role/ specialization

One word is the workplace or
function of the other word.

Author: write: : gardener: plant

Synonyms are considered a type of analogy. This analogy involves sets of words that mean the same thing, such as huge is similar to large and gigantic. On the other hand, an analogy with antonyms uses a set of words having opposite meanings, such as hot and cold or day and night. Part to whole analogy involves a set of words in which a part of something is compared to the whole in a way similar to another part of something is compared to the whole.

Type of Analogy | Examples | Explanation :

1. Synonym | Happy: joyful: : start: begin | Happy and joyful have the same meaning, as start and begin, so they are synonyms.
2. Antonym | Old: young: : far: near | Old and young are opposites as far and near. These words are antonyms.
3. Part to whole | Branch: tree: : wheel: car | The branch is part of the tree in the same manner as the wheel is part of a car. The relationship in this set of words is Part to whole.

For young readers like you, analogy is important in building your vocabulary
skills and developing critical thinking. How do analogies work? Through analogies,
learners will be able to develop a deep understanding of words by discovering meaningful
relationships. When they form logical connections between words, they form a "mental
network of ideas"; thus, comprehension is enhanced and retention is increased.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is a fact that we are living in a visual world. The introduction of the internet, social media networks, and the digital revolution have contributed to an “extraordinary” rise in visual communication, now being the primary mode of communication around the world. The changing nature of communication gives rise to the addition of viewing skill to the traditional skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking.

Common Types of Viewing Materials:

- A news flash is a single item of important news that is aired separately and often interrupts other programs. A brief item of important news that is delivered quickly so people do not miss it.

- A weather report is usually a part of an entire news program that tells and foretells weather conditions of a specific area. It helps viewers or listeners determine what the weather will be like for a given day and helps them plan trips and activities accordingly.

- A movie trailer is a short clip from a film. It is also known as a preview that gives highlights and features of the film that will be exhibited in the future at a cinema, usually to attract viewers to watch the movie.

- Internet-based programs are programs that are informative and can be accessed through a website. It is another source of information aside from textbooks or print materials, which students can access at their own pace.

- A documentary is research-based reporting that deals with a specific topic and format. A non-fiction program intended to document reality, basically for the purpose of instruction and education, maintaining a factual, historical record.

When students are exposed to non-print and moving images, communication and comprehension skills are further improved. Students are able to acquire, analyze, evaluate, and reflect on information from viewing materials. It is hoped that in viewing a material, they will become more effective, active, and critical viewers to be able to participate fully in the society they live in.

Viewing materials come in different forms and purposes. But each provides information useful to the readers and viewers. As a viewer, it is our responsibility to be critical and analytical of the materials we are viewing. We need to analyze whether information shown in the material is true and reliable.

Example Viewing Material : https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=947437899135330

When you analyze any viewing material or the example weather report, be guided by the following:

Questions | Answers

Information
• What is the material all about?
• What information does the material give to the viewers?

Answer: The material is about a weather report on tropical storm Fabian. It gives the details of the storm.

Purpose
• What is the purpose of the material?

Answer: The purpose of the material is to inform the public of the details of the storm so that they can make necessary preparations before the typhoon comes.

Audience
• To whom is the material addressed?
• Who is its audience?

Answer: The material is addressed to the public.

Value
• Is it truthful and reliable?
• Is it important?

Answer: Information about the weather or a storm must be truthful since the source comes from a reliable government agency whose main duty is to monitor the daily weather. To keep updated with the weather condition is important for people to secure lives and properties in case a calamity happens

(Below is the text used in the documentary shown above. Read carefully and answer the questions that follow.)

Overcoming Floods in the Philippines: A Story of Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation:

Sta Rosa, Philippines is frequently visited with heavy rains that cause flash floods and severe flooding in the area and nearby cities. The city sits on the edge of Laguna Lake, the largest lake in the Philippines and located just east of its capital city – Manila.

Professor Damasa Macandong of the University of the Philippines Institute of Biological Sciences says that climate change is causing stronger typhoons and rains to hit the Philippines.

The video, “Overcoming Floods in the Philippines: A story of climate change adaptation and mitigation” presents that rapid urbanization and industrialization contributed to the flooding problem.

Agricultural lands have been paved with impermeable materials to accommodate factories, commercial buildings, and housing projects, and public infrastructures like roads, the video-documentary mentions.

Japan’s Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) partnered with the University of the Philippines (UP) Los Baños to help Sta Rosa and neighboring towns to help adapt to increasing threats of flooding.

The partnership between the two institutions has led to the Participatory Watershed Land Use Management Project.

Through this partnership, the teams were able to combine their expertise to create flood hazard maps of the Sta Rosa watershed.

According to Mr. Endo, these hazard maps will help cities understand the present and future threats of flooding.

These hazard maps were able to simulate the condition of the watershed in 2025. Simulations show that massive flooding will affect the four cities comprising the watershed.

This information allowed local officials to work together and come up with an integrated approach to address flooding and implement adaptation strategies.

Know more about the climate adaptation and mitigation measures they have undertaken jointly by watching the video. Click the link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=An47ybg8xrA

Process Questions:
What is the text all about?
Who is the target audience of the given material?
What do you think is the purpose of the material?
How does the issue in the documentary affect you? How do you feel about it?
A documentary is a research-based reporting that deals with a specific topic and format. It is a non-fiction program intended to document reality basically for the purpose of instruction, information, and education of the public, maintaining a factual, historical record. Documentaries provide us the opportunity to understand, reflect on, and connect with the realities around us.

In analyzing a documentary, it is helpful to look for its general elements. Among them are the following:

1. Subject. The subject is what the documentary is about. A documentary presents the general human condition which covers issues like social issues, politics, crime, etc. In addition, documentaries include people, places, and events that are actual and usually contemporary.
2. Purpose. The purpose of the documentary is to present the topics that inform the audience about the people, places, events, institutions, and problems. It also aims to record and interpret the actual problems in front of the camera. It also informs and convinces the viewers to get a clearer view or take action about their subjects.
3. Audience. The audience is another important element in a documentary. The content must be relevant to the audience. The documentary must be created in such a way that it affects the viewers and leads them to action.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------